hope you enjoy the episode brought to
you by our sponsor
thrive get 50 off your at-home gut
health test when you go to
trythrive.com
impact theory enjoy the episode
it's been estimated that people who
typically don't get
enough restorative sleep will consume
close to
300 extra kilocalories each day
that adds up in just 10 days to a pound
of
body fat you know play that out over a
couple months and you see what happens
then that body fat further increases
inflammation
and further compromises our
decision-making abilities
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory i am here with dr david
perlmutter who's making his second
appearance on the show dr promoter
welcome
delighted to be back i i miss being
sitting next to you that was a lot of
fun it was a great day
but it's just uh also very delightful to
be connected this way as well
yeah i agree i do wish we were sitting
together but
uh it's been so much fun reading the
book
and as i was saying before we started
rolling the book brainwash is
terrifyingly prophetic uh you talk about
disconnection
and the impacts on the brain you'll be
talking a lot about the brain today how
we can
you know really get it ready uh to work
optimally which is a big thing for you
but it's just freaky that you wrote that
before we went into sort of the ultimate
of isolations
and i want to start with something that
you wrote in the book
a very early question that you pose
which you i think said in the book is is
pretty much the backbone
and that's why is health and
happiness so elusive i think in a word
i would say disconnection and you know
we really
took that apart in the book we really
unpacked this
the whole meaning of disconnection you
know it's funny because as i recall
uh that's how we left our conversation
last time isn't it we were talking about
this whole notion of disconnection
from our genome from our microbiome and
now we see
that people are disconnected from each
other and we also see
an incredible degree of polarization
which i think
none of us was ready to really
experience i mean the degree of
polarization that has happened
as a consequence of this stress upon the
system
pulled two sides apart and we've defined
two types of two populations of
individuals
who belie some believe a and some
believe b and
we are losing a type of empathy called
uh cognitive empathy which gives one
person let's say me
the ability to think of tom bilyeu's
perspective or to embrace your
perspective
try it on and see how it feels even
though i don't agree with you we don't
have that anymore
it's my way or the highway i dig my
heels in anyone who doesn't agree with
me we're going to
you know rally against and again i'm not
taking a particular side i mean it may
be
that the world is flat and i'm willing
to listen to
a discussion about what is your
narrative
but we don't see that anymore you know
we we talk about people going to
congress and saying they're going to
reach across the aisle that's what we
want we want to just
reach across here they you may not agree
with
what happens on the other side of the
aisle i would submit we've got to get
rid of the damn
aisle we have to just why don't you give
people seats according to where they
land in the alphabet and let them sit
next to people that they don't agree
with
let them talk it out what if i'm
interesting about your
approach sorry to jump in but what i
find interesting about your approach in
the book
is that one this is all coming from a
neurology perspective so you're actually
looking at the brain and one of the most
fascinating elements were one how you
define
disconnection i think it's important to
stop you actually have an image in the
book and it's like this trifecta
of things which i never in a million
years if somebody said our problem is
disconnection
i would not have thought that really
sort of
cellular explanation for what's
happening
and how that as we get chronic illness
and chronic inflammation
that it actually inhibits our ability to
access
the part of the brain that gives us that
executive function the ability to
do things as thoughtful as reach across
the aisle so if you can just walk us
through
how are you guys you and your son who
co-wrote the book how are you guys
defining disconnection
and good on you because you got it
obviously you got it we identified the
brain mechanics the substrate if you
will
for disconnection syndrome that you know
it began with
our discussion in this very room i might
add with of how we make decisions do we
make
our decisions impulsively or do we think
them through
are we reflexive or are we reflective
and we realize that there are two
important areas of the brain many areas
involved
but two important areas the amygdala
which is a
kind of a primitive fight or flight
sudden response area
that really serves only me isn't
involved in empathy isn't involved in
how my actions affect other people what
the future
outcome may be of my actions and then
another area that
is sort of our gift as humans and that
is the prefrontal cortex
other animals other mammals have a
prefrontal cortex but it's a third
of the cortex of the human brain which
is an awful lot
and that allows us to take a deep breath
to look at data
to think of how our choices affect
ourselves
in the future how they affect other
people
how we can be empathetic towards others
compassionate and have this thing we
just mentioned cognitive empathy
to take another person's viewpoint the
important part
of the disconnection is that this
prefrontal cortex let's call it the
adult in the room
exercises what we call top down control
over the amygdala and that begins to
develop around
age five years or so teenagers still
don't have a fully developed connection
so they're still a little bit
disconnected why they make decisions
that
aren't necessarily always good ones but
we all retain some sort of
impulsivity if you will directed by
this primitive reptilian brain the
amygdala
hopefully though as we mature the adult
exercises more and more control over our
impulsivity
we make better and better decisions that
think about not just ourselves but other
people think about
their points of view think about how my
actions are going to play out in the
future in terms of
choosing what to eat today choosing
whether i exercise or not
choosing all kinds of things that have
an impact not on only on me but others
and even on the planet
we therefore fundamentally
rely upon the connection of the
prefrontal cortex behind the forehead
to the amygdala in between your ears
to keep it in check to keep that you
know capricious
impulsive child in check and that's the
top-down
connection that we need to cultivate
now what threatens that connection and
leads to disconnection syndrome leads to
us being
impulsive i want it now i don't care
about you it's my way or the highway
are many factors not the least of which
is a very important mechanism called
inflammation you and i have talked about
inflammation before
in the context of brain disease in the
context of things like coronary arteries
diabetes cancer
obesity alzheimer's the very same
inflammation
threatens that connection it's also
threatened by
what we are bombarded with when we're
having our online experience
it's threatened by stress it's
threatened by the evening news
so many factors threaten to basically
lock us into impulsivity and
what's so worrisome is acting
impulsively strengthens our connection
to the impulsive center of the brain and
further
disconnects us so that's because neurons
of fire together wire together or
something
that's heavy in philosophy uh dr dr hebb
canadian researcher
talked about that and you know the more
you do something the more you do
something the dalai lama said that
the brain we develop reflects the life
we lead
and he also said interestingly that if
you want to
experience happiness practice compassion
if you want others to experience
happiness practice compassion so what
you said is so true that
doing things choosing to do things to
act in a more compassionate empathetic
forward-thinking way
does what it strengthens our connection
to that gift this prefrontal cortex
and allows us to act in mature
thoughtful ways
you give a really cool example uh in the
book of what happens when
that connection is um abruptly severed
as a way of really explaining what's
going on
and it's something i've talked about on
the show many times i don't think you
and i discussed it but
phineas gage so for anybody that doesn't
know phineas gage's story he's working
on the railroad
they use like these explosives to um use
on tamping rods basically and he hits a
tamping rod something goes wrong and it
shoots up
under his cheek and out through the top
of his head now i'd heard that a million
times
and in your book you said oh and the rod
is now
on display in a museum in harvard and i
was like wait wait wait wait
i need to look this thing up i had no
idea that you could see it and there's
photos
of phineas gage who by the way never
lost consciousness and
he goes from everybody was like hey this
guy was really nice and
if he had plans he followed through he
wasn't impulsive and then after it
all said now he's impulsive he can't
hold down a job
and in the book though you go into
something that is
never talked about with phineas gage and
i found this so interesting
if you don't mind walking us through
that part i think it will give hope to
people who are
impulsive now and feel sort of hopeless
good point and you know so this is an
interesting story that i think a lot of
people have quoted
of phineas gage back in 1858 who
[Music]
you know how he survived this is is
breathtaking and hit not just the bar
but his skull is on display at harvard
to this day
and he became suddenly impulsive
irreverent and nasty couldn't be around
other people
and you know the the wonderful part of
the story that i thought we really
needed to
bring to people's attention is the fact
that
years later he turned out to be a nice
person
again and what does that mean it means
that we have this ability to rewire our
brains
we have the ability to yes grow new
neurons
but also through what is called
neuroplasticity we can make new
connections and reroute
defective wiring now you know here's a
man who
essentially loses his prefrontal cortex
and regains functionality so
we included that in the book exactly for
the reasons you stated
to give people hope because make no
mistake about it our
day-to-day lives right now threaten our
prefrontal cortex
and threaten the connection of the
prefrontal cortex down to the amygdala
and therefore threaten to disconnect us
whether it's lack of sleep
or a high inflammatory type of diet and
read a modern western diet
stress lack of nature exposure lack of
exercise
even the various types of sub-nutrients
that we consume
so many factors conspire to sever that
connection to
drive an iron rod through our prefrontal
cortex if you will
you know that's a you know obviously a
very graphic example
but in in many ways what we've seen in
the past
year is a lot of impulsivity is a lot of
behavior based upon acting
without self regulation without the
input
of the prefrontal cortex making
decisions
based upon emotion and uh you know
as opposed to taking a step back looking
at what
you know authoritative figures are
trying to tell us
and then making our decisions now let me
just be clear tom
we need sudden impulsive decisions
that's for sure that's the beauty of the
amygdala
you know you're backing your car out of
the driveway
and your eye catches something in the
rear
in the back up camera a kid on a
tricycle now that's not when you want to
sit back and think gee
get on a tricycle probably a good idea
lift my foot off the gas
and put it on the brake because you know
that's going to have a good outcome no
you want to act suddenly impulsively
call it reflexively if you will
and you do then you realize what the
heck just happened you say thank
goodness i acted that way
the problem is though that people these
days seem to be acting
that way without restraint at the drop
of a hat and
again so many of the influences
on that activity are under our control
we can pull ourselves back from that
and regain this valuable gift that we
have
as humans and that is the connection to
this prefrontal cortex
so you do a phenomenal job in the book
of walking people through
sort of the cellular mechanisms of why
things are breaking down
and then in the end you tell them okay
so this is how they break down this is
how we build them back up the right way
i want to follow that format a bit and
walk people through
cellularly what's happening like you you
made a statement in the book
that um two in fact i'll walk through
both one was a quote of gary tobbs which
i thought was
really interesting and then you bring it
together for the reader so the first one
is gary taub saying
hey we don't get fat because we overeat
we overeat because we're getting food
getting fat
now i i want people to really like stop
and think about that that
there is a signaling going on a hormonal
thing that's happening
and then you follow it up to bring it
back to your point about disconnection
where you say
that the actual increase the increased
volume of our fat cells
stops us from having access to our
prefrontal cortex
so walk people through how on earth that
could be true
sure let's first talk about gary tab's
statement that people
aren't getting fat because they overeat
they're overeating a decision
because they're getting fat body fat is
pro-inflammatory
inflammatory chemicals threaten the
connection
the top-down control the decision-making
apparatus that we have from the
prefrontal cortex to the
amygdala such that we make more
impulsive
food decisions and we cannot easily
self-regulate
so that's the reason he made that
statement why we included because
the fatter people get the less able they
are to rein in
their appetites and to make good choices
as it relates to the foods they
that they eat that creates please
forgive the pun
a feed forward cycle whereby eating the
wrong foods
tends to beget further eating of the
wrong foods let me give you another
example
and we've all been through this i mean
certainly anybody who's done a residency
program and has been up all night
you realize that the very next day you
eat whatever
you can find and they're not good
nutritional choices by and large people
who don't get a
restorative night's sleep have as much
as a 60
higher activation of their amygdala so
the amygdala takes charge
so that takes charge in terms of the
foods we eat in terms of everything we
do that very next day we've all missed a
night's sleep
and you realize how cranky you are but
you make bad decisions
so those decisions extend to our food
choices and what happens we eat
high sugar foods uh foods that we know
are not good for us but we just can't
control ourselves because the amygdala
has taken control there's a
five-year-old making our
nutritional decisions for us it's been
estimated that people who
typically don't get enough restorative
sleep
we'll consume close to 300 extra
kilocalories
each day that adds up in just 10 days to
a pound
of body fat you know play that out over
a couple months and you see what happens
then that body fat further
increases inflammation and further
compromises
our decision-making ability i remember
when i'd be up all night
during residency we would you know we'd
be in the operating room
all night long with who knows what i
mean gunshot wounds to the brain you
name it
and the following morning the only place
i could get what i felt i wanted was i
would go to the pediatrics floor and i
would open
the refrigerator and get baby food now
in those
days baby food was loaded with fructose
uh sucrose and high fructose corn syrup
because they felt that
uh that would get babies to really like
it and moms would be happy because kids
would be eating the baby food
the banana one especially was so good
but
i knew even back then that wasn't good
for me but i literally could not control
myself and
you know i think that we all recognize
that when we've not gotten enough sleep
that we make bad decisions now here's
what uh
really looks worrisome and that is you
know about 50 percent of americans will
indicate that they
don't at least once a week get enough
restorative sleep
and feel that experience the next day
and understand that as you
gain weight you sleep your risk of
having bad sleep is increased
your risk of having sleep apnea the risk
of having other issues related to poor
sleep
increases so we could play on gary
taub's statement
and saying we don't sleep poorly because
we're getting fat we're getting fat
because we sleep poorly or vice versa
think about it the more you don't sleep
well the fatter you'll get
the worse you will sleep well and the
worse will be
your food uh choices decision making but
it's not just related to those lifestyle
issues
it's really decision making across the
board that that uh
this impacts who in the book
you guys call your shop pretty early and
say you know when we first started
researching this book we
never would have guessed where it was
going to take us and we realized pretty
early on that we'd stumbled onto
something that was
really really big and reading the book
it is it's what you just walk people
through it's a pretty terrifying
positive self-reinforcing loop where
one bad decision begets another begets
another begets another and you talk
about
um big food big ag and so when i think
about what was the
the you know that first push that gets
this sort of negative cycle going
and i mean you lay it out man like the
number one thing that people say that
they eat for breakfast
is cold cereal that's already terrifying
uh
and so things that people think that
they're eating that are healthy end up
being
wildly problematic now is this a
function
of inflammation like if we were going to
lay something
okay so now let me push that even
further do you know the mechanism that's
happening like
why does inflammation stop the the
effective communication between the
amygdala and the prefrontal cortex
it's it's a very good question and it's
not been fully teased out has it been
validated
you bet it's been aggressively validated
and there are you know plenty of
hypotheses we know that by and large
connectivity in the brain beyond this
circuitry
but the connectivity that allows us for
example to recruit
previous memories to recruit other
engrams in our past
to help us make decisions today are
compromised by the process of
inflammation so
in a global sense inflammation
compromises brain function
now this pathway is exceedingly active
or at least it should be so it is
extremely threatened by a
inflammation b lack of adequate amounts
of
fuel adequate ability to utilize glucose
for example
but specifically you know the
relationship through inflammation
i think is still being teased apart
inflammation has other
effects in terms of the brain and
certainly in terms of our behavior
inflammation threatens our ability to
manufacture
a neurotransmitter called serotonin
i hate to call it the happy uh
neurotransmitter but
we know that there's evidence that
suggests that serotonin
activation in certain pathways does tend
to
be related to things like depression and
it's the reason we have ssris which are
only minimally effective but
how incredible it is that the the
use of ssris has increased 400 percent
uh since the late 1990s i'm just going
to say
correlates with some incredible dietary
changes that have happened
uh you know in in western cultures but
that said
inflammation getting back to our topic
changes
a biochemical pathway by which
tryptophan
is made into serotonin and this is
called
the i don't mean to be too technical but
it's called the kind urinic acid pathway
i'll tell you why that's important so in
the presence of inflammation
tryptophan can go one way make serotonin
or it can go another way to make kind
urinic acid
if there's a lot of inflammation it's
taken away from making serotonin
less serotonin now and goes into
measuring conuranic acid
so you have a buildup of kanaranic acid
which threatens
nerve transmission and that may also be
a player in the connection you asked
about
between the prefrontal cortex and the
amygdala you can measure kind urinic
acid there are laboratory med
laboratories that your doctor can do a
blood cyanuranic acid
on you right now i mean it's nothing
really exotic
and it's an implication of a lot of
inflammation in your body
and that your ability to produce
serotonin
is compromised now that relates to so
many factors that deal with
inflammation in your body like diet like
the microbiome like stress
and lack of sleep lack of sleep
powerfully
augments inflammation and it's again the
reason that it's related to so many
issues like diabetes
and obesity and cancer risk and
alzheimer's risk it's through this
amplification of inflammation let's talk
about
thrive did you guys know that your gut
is related to so
many potential health issues trouble
focusing bloating constipation
maintaining a healthy weight and skin
blemishes like acne and eczema
our gut communicates with our brain
through nerves and hormones and when gut
health
is poor it can directly contribute to
these types of health concerns
my wife lisa has struggled profoundly
with gut problems so i know exactly how
troublesome this can be
unfortunately lisa is not alone in this
battle one in five americans are
struggling with gut
health issues thankfully we can fix a
lot of these issues with a better diet
and the right probiotics
and thrive makes this process really
simple by offering an
at-home gut health test so you can know
the state of your gut health
and what problems it may be causing
thrive will then use your results to
develop
custom probiotics to help treat these
problems
these aren't the one-size-fits-all
probiotics you will find at your local
grocery store
these are personalized to you based on
the results of the test
thrive is easy convenient and accessible
thrive sends the test straight to your
door and based on your thrive test
results
they will customize a diet and probiotic
suggestions
just for you when you subscribe to
thrive's program you can also save 10
on all probiotics and other products
they provide
you can get 50 off your at-home gut
health test when you go to
try thrive dot com slash impact theory
that's tri-thrive.com
impact theory and thrive is spelled
t-h-r-y-v-e
go there right now for fifty percent off
your at-home
gut health test again that's
trithrive.com
forward slash impact theory all right
guys take care
be legendary yeah
man this is one of those where when i
see the way that people
lead their lives and they're making
choices and
and it is true that back in the day i
would have been like yo you need to get
your willpower in check you need to
really be thinking about this stuff
and i won't say that i i think people
should abdicate their responsibilities
but
understanding how these cascades begin
and that once they begin you're getting
hit from so many different angles
in terms of taking optimal cognition and
reducing it so dramatically that it
becomes
not impossible but wow you're digging a
hole from which it becomes increasingly
more and more difficult to get out of um
so i'm going to list what i think
i remember from the book as being sort
of the big players of inflammation
and breaking this bond let me know if i
miss anything
um so lack of sleep is huge i feel like
a different
person i feel like i actually have a
different personality
when you do poor sleep it is surreal
arguments in my brain
where i'm like hey you know hey you
should just have like
look you know that a little bit of sugar
right now would make you feel better
give you a little bit of energy so go
ahead and just grab a quick you know bit
of chocolate or whatever
during the like if i'm well rested that
argument does not hold any sway i'm like
get out of here like i have a goal
i know what i'm eating today and that's
that but suddenly that argument makes
all the sense in the world when i
haven't gotten sleep
can i can i stop you right there tom
please because what you just said
could be the one take-home message for
our entire time together today
you can just understand that your
decision making is
uh threatened or or enhanced
by whether or not you get a good night's
sleep you know go out and buy a wearable
get an or ring whatever
but figure it out fix your room get off
the computer
don't drink coffee after two o'clock
whatever it may be
if you could just take home that one
message that you just
wonderfully articulated that would be
the home run no question
um walk me through so we've got the
inflammation we've got lack of sleep
we've got poor decision-making
exacerbated we've got our bad diet
and the inflammation is making us make
worse decisions we get in this
you know very bad a negative positive
feedback loop of the worse we eat the
worse we want to eat
when we're locked in that
vault of death how do we begin to unwind
it
what does that process look like so
that's that's a great question because
we offer a lot of on-ramps to better
decision-making
and you know the the book had its
genesis in this room
when austin and i were just talking
about what is the most frustrating part
about being a
physician and we realized that you know
it's kind of a three-step process to get
to have patients do what you want them
to do number one
we have to learn the information as best
we can you go to medical school you read
the journals
you attend the conferences number one
number two we have to purvey that
knowledge we have to be
good purveyors good communicators give
that knowledge
impart that knowledge to the patient and
number three that patient
acts upon the information we realized
that nobody was talking about step three
that when the patient comes back to the
clinic
a month later and has gained weight
blood sugar is higher it's whatever
that what do we do we write in the chart
that that patient is non-compliant
that's a kind of an awful thing to hang
on somebody it's basically pointing a
finger saying
you know you just can't carry it out i i
did my part
hit the ball over the net and you
dropped the ball and
we realized it's time to stop that
because we
understand that they just don't have the
decision-making apparatus working well
in their brains to make that good
decision stop blaming them
you know damn well those patients go
home
doctor visit after doctor visit they
look in the mirror
and they blame themselves they say you
know i i went to the doctor today and i
i know what i'm supposed to do i can't
do it
or i read the book i watch the pbs
special i want to
follow xyz diet whether it's keto paleo
whatever it is
i can't do it i crash and burn something
must be wrong with me
self-blame which is a very very heavy
burden
so we realize that their brains are re
are need to be rewired to allow them the
opportunity to make better decisions and
this is what i alluded to a moment ago
by having an on ramp to better decision
making
and therefore real in a real world
example there's that patient with type 2
diabetes gaining weight
it's not going to be helpful to give
that person a pre-printed
sheet a diet and say here you go mr
jones take this
next time i see you i want your blood
sugar to be better i want you to lose
five pounds
that is not going to work what needs to
happen is we
need to have another on-ramp to better
decision-making for that individual
it might be that you know this man is
going to expect
the diet because he's gotten that with
his last five health care providers
but you say instead listen i'm not going
to give you a dietary plan
at this visit because i know likely
you're not going to follow it and i'm
not blaming you
but i want to help you make better
decisions and here's how
we're going to first take a deep dive
into how
you sleep what is the hygiene associated
with your sleep related choices
how late are you on the computer what
time do you have your last cup of coffee
what time of day do you exercise all the
things we know really very important for
getting a good night's sleep does your
partner wake you does she or he
uh have sleep apnea or kick you at night
whatever it may be
and i'm going to give you uh a wearable
device that you can upload to your
smartphone we'll get a real sense as to
the length you sleep the quality of your
sleep how much deep sleep how much
rem sleep etc we'll get a lot of
dynamics and that'll give us
opportunities to
modulate things in your life to help you
get a better sleep
then when that patient comes back you've
worked on the problem which is not their
diet it's their decision-making
apparatus
now they're in a better place just like
tom bilyeu was saying
you make bad decisions that next day
when you haven't slept it's
universal we're all that way and it
might be sleep it might be they sleep
well it might be they just don't get out
of nature enough it might be a simple
meditation program
there are a lot of on-ramps we have a 10
a 10-step
program that offer people ways of
getting back to better decision-making
and
just like we had a problem before where
one bad decision
begets another bad decision we can play
that to our advantage
whereby making just one simple change we
suddenly
improve our chances then of making
a better decision as it relates to
something else it's like
uh action leads to a reaction in this
case an action of
getting a better night's sleep leads to
the reaction
of making better decisions or another
newtonian law
uh that deals with exercise that objects
in motion
like your body tend to remain in motion
when you first
engage in exercise program likely it's
going to help you continue that
what are some of the 10 on ramps so
sleep obviously is going to be one of
them
uh what are some of the others sleep is
so huge and let me just
you know finally reiterate that you know
this is something we spend a third of
our lives doing
or we should we don't spend a third of
our lives exercising or eating which are
important obviously
but so underrated in our world of trying
to be productive and getting a leg up on
the next person
you want to be productive sleep more and
sleep
better in terms of the quality
i you know we look at a lot of things
certainly we talk about meditation
research demonstrates dr andrew
newberg's led us
in in this area indicates that
meditation lights up the prefrontal
cortex
you can do functional mris on people who
do meditation
and they can be only a short period of
time six weeks
they have now lit up their prefrontal
cortex in terms of brain activity can
you imagine
what a tonic person themselves like to
do impulse control like i need to sit
here i need to focus on my breath
what is it that's lighting it up what
the act of mindfulness
is lighting up their prefrontal cortex
and it can be mindfulness towards a
prayer it can be mindfulness towards a
mantra
it can be a simple breath whatever
is mindful allows the prefrontal cortex
to light up
and i would submit that that is a big
goal of ours today and that is to be
mindful of whatever activity
uh we are engaged in uh you know there's
people say oh i i'm really good at
multitasking well
nobody can actually multitask we go from
one task
to another task and then back to the
first task or the third test
we're always skipping around we're not
really engaging many tasks
and our efficiency when we are so called
multitasking or engaging
many issues at one time is a lot less
than if we stayed on one task
being mindful allows better decision
making
being on your smartphone during
a meal leads to an increased consumption
average of 200 calories
because you're not mindful of what you
are doing i remember years ago i
attended a a lecture by deepak chopra
and you said somebody asked the question
dr chopra
what can i do about my cigarette smoking
and he said to this person
the next time you want to smoke a
cigarette and you should
stop what you're doing go outside
sit down and think about cigarette
smoking while you're smoking
and what he was saying is being mindful
of that act you know we all know that's
a health destructive
act but i would submit that the reason
he said that is because
that individual is now not going to
mindlessly smoke on the phone or during
a meal or doing the
while driving and that will be an
improvement for that individual
likely he or she will smoke less and
finally make that connection
to the negativity of what that cigarette
smoking is doing to his or her body
so first of all it focuses us to
dedicating a certain time to that
activity in the day
so it's helping us triage our day and of
course the amplification of the
prefrontal cortex
activity meditation reduces
inflammation that's our goal meditation
reduces cortisol
why do we want to reduce cortisol the
stress hormone because cortisol among
other attributes
disrupts our gut bacteria and leads to
increased gut leakiness or permeability
another mechanism that leads to
inflammation
it's why we see higher levels of
inflammation in people who
take certain medications like
non-steroid anti-inflammatories which
are designed to reduce inflammation
ultimately you're working against
yourself acid blocking drugs and
certainly antibiotics
certainly diet plays upon the microbiome
to increase inflammation as well
we call upon um readers
to keep a gratitude journal who knew
to take a little bit of time and to
write down what you're grateful for
you know the moment you do that it's
transcendent
because you focus from all the things
that you think you have to do
to what has already happened and what it
has done
for you what you are grateful for that
powerfully like meditation connects you
to the prefrontal cortex
yeah that one trips me out the fact that
merely by
thinking about something specific you
can change your neurochemistry in such a
way that if
that it has an effect on your whole body
physiology
like that that's one of those like sleep
is so
under used as a you know quote-unquote
treatment
uh but incredibly powerful i i have to
say as we're having this conversation
it's it's like i've never thought about
this before because
it you know it's what we wrote about
obviously but every time i
um elucidate this it's just
so powerful that we have that degree of
control
that simply thinking about something
does rewire your brain
you know it's the reason that
professional athletes some
rehearse you know that what they're
going to do on the tennis court or
whatever their sport needs to be before
they go out there they go through the
whole thing
you change your brain by thinking about
playing the piano yeah you do when you
play the piano and learn a piece but
simply
thinking about that piece will actually
restructure your brain it's like
as i mentioned the dalai lama said that
the brain we build
reflects the life we live the choices
that we make
being kind and considerate and
empathetic towards others
takes us closer to the prefrontal cortex
and away
from the self-centered narcissistic
impulsive
areas of the brain like the amygdala so
we
we can choose and please understand
that you know another part of the book
really as you've already called out
talks about how the world conspires to
take us away from that that the pop-up
ads that magically appear on our online
experience that seem to be very
interesting for us who knew
are taking away from our ability to stay
on task
and really letting us believe that uh
instant gratification is the way to
happiness
and it isn't i mean it is exactly wiring
us into
the amygdala and it's keeping us from
really achieving
what i call enlightenment and to me if
you were to ask
enlightenment is being as connected to
that gift
the prefrontal cortex as we possibly can
because it's
then that we can conceptualize the
future
and make decisions to pave way for a
better future
and it's the key to really engaging the
notion of community of
my actions being imparted
and having influence on the
the survivability and happiness of
another individual and the planet as
well
i mean research demonstrates that people
who engage nature which enhances
prefrontal cortex
activity are more kind to nature are
more environmentally involved if you
will
one thing that i found interesting about
the research that you touch on in the
book around nature is that you can show
somebody 10 seconds
of an image of nature and they're less
impulsive in their decision making i was
like what how's that possible
so that's an interesting study and there
are a lot of them
it looks at a technique called delayed
discounting which is really
uh used in psychological testing as a
measurement of impulsivity so are you
able to basically do the adult thing
delay gratification or not
and what they did in that study was
really quite interesting they asked
people do you want a dollar now or a
hundred dollars
if you wait at the beginning of the test
everybody says hey
i can wait the question is how long are
you willing to wait
people were shown either images of the
city
images of nature or then just geometric
images
that were thought to be at the beginning
to test the control
but interestingly the geometric images
and the city images
had the same outcome in comparison to
showing people just a picture
of a natural environment those people
who saw that picture
were able to say i'll wait i think it
was up to you know ten
years to get ten dollars as opposed to
one dollar
whereas the other people that were shown
the city
or the geometric shapes you know their
their time until they said nah
just give me uh give me the dollar and
i'm out of here they couldn't wait they
were impulsive
that time was a lot shorter so that's
kind of a
delayed discounting is kind of a
standard test for impulsivity
a new study came out in december 2020
that actually
looked at the relationship between
functional mri
imaging of the connection looking at
this connection
between prefrontal cortex and amygdala
and then measurements of
impulsivity and found exactly what it is
that we described so they
validated the notion that when you lose
the
connectivity or it's at a lower level
you have more
traits of impulsivity and that relates
to things like
drug addiction for example adhd other
issues
now putting this in a modern context one
of the things you talk about if i
remember right from the i think you
called the 10-day
brainwash reset is technology
and people's um abusive
wasn't your word my word abusive
relationship with technology
i think in fact this was what made you
bring up the suicide statistics that the
people who are addicted to
um social media internet i forget the
exact
wording but they have a significantly
increased
risk of suicide am i remembering that
correctly
you are and you know
addiction is defined as you know engaged
in activity that interferes with your
ability to
be productive to care for yourself and
interferes with your family
relationships etc
classic definition it applies to use of
the internet
so it's estimated that six percent of
internet users are in fact
qualified or characterized as being
addicted
that's a lot of people that's you know
that's five times the population of
england it's a quarter billion people
who satisfy that criteria for addiction
and they have up to a four four-fold
increased risk for
suicide depending on their age younger
is higher risk for suicide so you know
the average
american spends 42 percent of his or her
day in front of one form of
screen or another whether it's a a pad
a computer phone television and
that has an effect because there's a lot
of inputs into your brain that are
happening
during that experience a and b
it's been said that when you're doing
one thing you're not doing something
else you're not exercising you're not
preparing your meals you're not
interacting socially with other people
uh and all the other things that are
an important part of your day so it
becomes a very big issue especially we
recognize that online
our brains are being manipulated by
advertisements and
advertisers who want us to make
decisions for their benefit not for our
benefit not for our health
benefit uh etc you know
the notion of of social interaction
is interesting because you know that's a
social media
platforms are a huge hack
into our primitive desire to be social
to
you know we evolved as social beings
with division of labor and
you know having each other's backs that
you know
was effective for us and allowed us to
survive it's a survival mechanism
that's being hacked into by various
social media platforms
much as our desire to eat sweet food
is it you know that's ingrained as a
survival mechanism
our ancestors gravitated towards sweet
foods because it made them
make body fat which allowed them to
survive during times of caloric scarcity
we all
carry that heredity that sweet tooth
that makes us
desire sweet that's hacked into
the you know hacked into our brains by
man
you know sixty percent of the two
million foods at the grocery store
have added sweetener not because it's
you know cheap or it's
uh you know going to make the food have
a shelf life but because we're going to
eat more of it we're going to buy more
of it so
there's a lot of hacking that goes on to
some of these primitive
ingrained issues in our in our in our
brains that
make us behave or make us think we want
to behave in certain ways
yeah seeing you guys put together like
this sort of defense against the dark
arts to use a harry potter term in the
book
was you know a lot of really um
accessible things that i thought were
fantastic from all right obviously
getting sleep getting some exercise get
the
body moving limiting your technology um
forest bathing you know getting out
getting in nature
it it is a very comprehensive look at
what people need to do one element
though i'd like to dive into
if you were going to give people broad
strokes on diet
what would be if you want optimal
cognition what are the
the you know small handful of things we
know we want to avoid and then the small
handful of things we know we want to go
for
i think the biggest issue today is
fructose
so it's a very interesting story tom and
[Music]
it begins 14 million years ago in the
middle myosin period when our primate
ancestors
were experiencing a time over a couple
million years
of cold and reduction in
food availability these primates
had already migrated out of africa
through a land bridge because it was so
cold that
sea level had fallen because of all the
ice being trapped in the poles
they're able to migrate into asia and
europe
and there was environmental pressure on
these primate ancestors
to survive in times of caloric scarcity
some of them developed
mutations in a gene that made a chemical
called uricase
that is an enzyme that breaks down uric
acid
such that those primates who lost
uricase
had higher levels of uric acid in their
systems each and every human walking the
planet
has inherited that we don't have
functioning uricase
it's why amongst all mammals we have
among
the we are among the highest in the
levels of uric acid
in our bodies what does uric acid do
uric acid we used to think was important
if you had gout or kidney stones that's
why doctors measured it
we now know and this is a brand new
story it's what i'm writing my new book
about
we now know that uric acid amplifies
inflammation
it powerfully initiates fat storage it
powerfully leads to insulin resistance
it amplifies our
mechanisms that increase our blood
pressure it
causes our bellies to get bigger all the
bad parts of what's called metabolic
syndrome are amplified
by this uric acid and one of the most
powerful ways that we augment uric acid
in human physiology is fructose
fructose is what caused our ancestors
our primates to make
body fat and allow them to survive
during times of caloric scarcity
where were they getting it back in the
day fruit fruit whatever fruit they
could find
and they ate an awful awful lot of fruit
when they could find it but
the fact is when you would compare those
animals that didn't have this mutation
to those who
did those who who had the mutation
couldn't break down
uric acid built up the uric acid
survived this was
a mechanism whereby they made more body
fat not that they became fat
but they made enough fat to survive so
not
it was survival of the fattest the
problem is that
that's who we are today we are we were
carrying this legacy that says when you
eat fructose you're going to make body
fat
you're going to become insulin resistant
you're going to increase your level of
inflammation
in your body your blood pressure is
going to go up and cognitively you're
going to decline as well
so it's it's a really exciting new story
and
i think that what we have to emphasize
is limitation of fructose
in its raw form as in sugar sweetened
beverages
and fruit juices and also look at other
ways that we
increase uric acid in our bodies by
ingesting foods that are high in purines
these are things
like sardines anchovies organ meats etc
by and large we have to do everything we
can
to not become insulin resistant
our metabolism meaning specifically how
we handle glucose in our bodies
is key to our health across the spectrum
of discipline
whether we're talking about the brain
the heart any organ in the body
everything really depends on how we
handle glucose
now each of us is different so how would
you handle
what is your body's response to glucose
based upon the foods you eat i don't
know but i can tell you
that if you were to get a device called
a continuous glucose monitor
you would know moment to moment what
your blood sugar is and how you
responded to that exercise you did this
morning
whether you had in my case almonds
versus cashews
i learned something really profound
about my blood sugar based upon
knowing what my blood sugar is in
various types of foods
knowing your glucose response is so
fundamental
to your overall health i would say
longevity
and certainly absolutely your brain
health
you've got to know your blood sugar and
how your blood sugar responds to your
various lifestyle choices
higher blood sugar translates to
inflammation
inflammation as we've talked about means
poor choices
it means increased risk of alzheimer's
coronary heart disease diabetes obesity
and it means disconnection syndrome it
means cutting off
your prefrontal cortex ability to
influence and to modulate
to be the adult in the room the control
over
the amygdala so when you ask what are
the keys
diet for brain health it is any diet
that's going to keep your blood sugar
in check by and large a diet that
does its best to eliminate refined carbs
certainly sugars
a diet that's really high in fiber i
would say
mostly plant-based and i think that you
know obviously when we get more subtle
influences i would say as organic as
possible
i would avoid things like gmo not
because gmo foods inherently are bad
but because of the fact that by and
large
foods are genetically modified this day
and age
to allow the use of herbicides
like glyphosate on them and then we get
traces of this glyphosate which does
what
according to dr stephanie senoff it
changes our gut bacteria
what does that do amplifies inflammation
and we're back to where we started oh
where can people connect with you dr
perlmutter where's the best way to
to follow along as you learn all this
stuff well i just joined clubhouse so
that's kind of a lot of fun
nice yeah austin and i do a thing every
friday at four o'clock eastern about
brain health and
boy we've been talking about everything
so for any clubhouse members
which uh i think we'll see a lot more of
really soon
um drpearlmutter.com drpearlmutter.com
is my website uh the empower neurologist
on youtube is my podcast
uh instagram i think is david perlmutter
facebook davidpromuttermd
but um that's where you'll find us the
book is brainwashed that is everywhere
so
awesome well i cannot wait for the next
round the next book
uh that will be a lot of fun and guys
speaking of things that are a lot of fun
if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit
and unlocking your full potential
you